+++
date = "2024-09-11T00:00:00+00:00"
title = "STAC 1.1.0 released"
tags = [ "STAC" ]
summary = "STAC 1.1.0 was released. We provide an overview of the changes in the new version."
author_url = "https://mohr.ws/"
author_title = "[Radiant Earth](https://radiant.earth/) Technology Fellow"
+++

We are proud to announce the final release of **[STAC 1.1.0](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/releases/tag/v1.1.0)**.

The focus has been the addition of a [common band construct](#bands) to unify the fields `eo:bands` and `raster:bands`.
Additionally, [Item Asset Definition](#item-asset-defintions) (field `item_assets`) - formerly a popular STAC extension - is now part of the core specification.
Various [additional fields](#common-metadata) have been made available via the common metadata mechanism, e.g. `keywords`, `roles`, `data_type` and `unit`.
We collaborated closely with the editors of OGC API - Records to align better with STAC, which resulted, for example, in a change to the [`license`](#license) field.
The [link object](#links) was extended to support additional HTTP mechanisms such as HTTP methods other than `GET` and HTTP headers.
The [best practices](#best-practices) have evolved and various minor changes and clarifications were integrated throughout the specification.

A shoutout to all the participants and sponsors of the last STAC sprint in Philadelphia, who laid a solid basis for this release.
Emmanuel Mathot and I were then funded by the STAC PSC to finalize the work. Thank you to everyone who made this possible.

Please read the [release notes](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/releases/tag/v1.1.0) for all changes that have been made to the specification since v1.0.0. In the following sections, we'll highlight the most important changes in the specification with some JSON snippets.

The changes since v1.1.0-beta.1 are minor. We added media types to the best practices, clarified that `item_assets` in Collections are not required and better describe the Statistics Object in common metadata.

*Note: The following information is the very similar to the information provided in the v1.1.0-beta.1 blog post.*

## Bands

As of STAC 1.1, the `bands` array merges the similar but separate fields `eo:bands` and `raster:bands`, which was probably one of the most annoying things in STAC for [historical reasons](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/discussions/1213). The new `bands` field can be used in combination with [property inheritance](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/master/commons/assets.md#additional-fields) to provide users with more flexibility.

It should be relatively simple to migrate from STAC 1.0 (i.e. from `eo:bands` and/or `raster:bands`) to the new `bands` array.
Usually, you can merge each object on a by-index basis.
For some fields, you need to add the extension prefix of the `eo` or `raster` extension to the property name.
Nevertheless, you should consider deduplicating properties with the same values across all bands to the Asset.
Please also consider the [Bands best practices](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/master/best-practices.md#bands) when migrating from `eo:bands` and `raster:bands`. It also provides more specific examples.

STAC 1.0 example:

```json
{
  "assets": {
    "example": {
      "href": "example.tif",
      "eo:bands": [
        {
          "name": "r",
          "common_name": "red"
        },
        {
          "name": "g",
          "common_name": "green"
        },
        {
          "name": "b",
          "common_name": "blue"
        },
        {
          "name": "nir",
          "common_name": "nir"
        }
      ],
      "raster:bands": [
        {
          "data_type": "uint16",
          "spatial_resolution": 10,
          "sampling": "area"
        },
        {
          "data_type": "uint16",
          "spatial_resolution": 10,
          "sampling": "area"
        },
        {
          "data_type": "uint16",
          "spatial_resolution": 10,
          "sampling": "area"
        },
        {
          "data_type": "uint16",
          "spatial_resolution": 30,
          "sampling": "area"
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

After migrating to STAC 1.1 this is ideally provided as follows:

```json
{
  "assets": {
    "example": {
      "href": "example.tif",
      "data_type": "uint16",
      "raster:sampling": "area",
      "raster:spatial_resolution": 10,
      "bands": [
        {
          "name": "r",
          "eo:common_name": "red",
        },
        {
          "name": "g",
          "eo:common_name": "green"
        },
        {
          "name": "b",
          "eo:common_name": "blue"
        },
        {
          "name": "nir",
          "eo:common_name": "nir",
          "raster:spatial_resolution": 30
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

Apart from a much shorter and more readable list of bands, you'll notice the following:

- The arrays have been merged into a single property `bands`.
- The properties `common_name` and `spatial_resolution` were renamed to include the extension prefixes.
- The properties `data_type` and `raster:sampling` (renamed from `sampling`) were deduplicated to the Asset
  as the values were the same across all bands.
- The `spatial_resolution` was also deduplicated, i.e. `10` is provided on the asset level,
  which is inherited by the bands unless explicitly overridden.
  Therefore, the `nir` band overrides the value `10` with a value of `30`.

As a result, the new `bands` array is more lightweight and easier to handle.

To make all this possible there were corresponding changes and releases for the following two extensions:

- The Electro Optical (EO) extension was [updated to v2.0.0](https://github.com/stac-extensions/eo/releases/tag/v2.0.0)
- The Raster extension was also [updated to v2.0.0](https://github.com/stac-extensions/raster/releases/tag/v2.0.0)

## License

To better align with OGC API - Records, we slightly changed the `license` field.
The license field additionally supports SPDX expressions and the value `other`.
At the same time, the values `proprietary` and `various` were deprecated in favor of SPDX expressions and `other`.
The new value `other` also solves an issue many data providers reported with the term `proprietary`, which was misleading for open licenses that were just not listed in the SPDX database.

## Common Metadata

The list of fields in the STAC [common metadata](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/v1.1.0/commons/common-metadata.md) model was extended, which partially was a result of the changes to the bands mentioned above.

The following fields were added:

- `bands` (see [above](#bands))
- `keywords` (as formerly defined in Collections)
- `roles` (as formerly defined in Assets)
- `data_type`, `nodata`, `statistics` and `unit` (as formerly defined in the Raster extension)

Please also note that the specification was restructured a bit so that common elements such as [Assets](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/v1.1.0/commons/assets.md) and [Links](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/v1.1.0/commons/links.md) are not defined in each specification (Catalog, Collection, Item) anymore,
but instead, they are separately defined once in the [commons folder](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/tree/v1.1.0/commons).

## Links

The Link Object used for the `links` field, has been extended to support more HTTP mechanisms.
The additions were already specified in STAC API 1.0.0 but were forgotten to be added to STAC 1.0.0, so we are catching up now.

The following additional fields are available for links:

- `method`: The HTTP method (e.g. `POST`) to use for the links (defaults to `GET`)
- `headers`: The HTTP headers to send alongside the link request
- `body`: The request body to send for the link request (usually only applies to `POST`, `PUT` and `PATCH` methods)

In addition to the extended Link Object, various smaller changes were made to link-related subjects:

- Links with the relation type `self` are now validated and as such are required to be absolute.
- The best practice recommends that link titles should exactly reflect the title of the corresponding entity
- It was clarified how URL resolving mechanics (for links and assets) work, i.e. that trailing slashes in URLs are significant

For links with relation type `parent` and `root` a clarification was issued:
Conceptually, STAC entities shall have no more than one parent entity.
As such, STAC entities also can have no more than one root entity.
So there's usually just one link with `root` or `parent` relationship
unless different variations of the same conceptual entity exist (identified by the ID).
Different variations could be:

- a different encoding (see the `type` property), e.g. a HTML version in addition to JSON
- a different language (see the `hreflang` property). e.g. a German version in addition to English

Similarly, it was clarified that multiple collections can point to an Item, but an Item can only point back to a single collection.

## Item Asset Defintions

The `item_assets` field that was previously an [extension](https://github.com/stac-extensions/item-assets) is now part of the STAC specification.
It was probably the most commonly used extension and many extensions were defining schemas for it, so it is simpler to have it in the core specification.

No changes are required in the migration, although you can remove the schema URI of the extension (i.e. `https://stac-extensions.github.io/item-assets/v1.0.0/schema.json`) from the `stac_extensions` property.
It doesn't hurt to keep the schema URI though and although the extension was deprecated, the extension can still be used in STAC 1.0.0. It just won't get any updates in the future, because any changes will be directly integrated into STAC itself.

## Best Practices

The following [best practices](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/v1.1.0/best-practices.md) were introduced or have changed:

- [Link titles should exactly reflect the title of the corresponding entity](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/v1.1.0/best-practices.md#titles)
- [Explained URL resolving mechanics](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/v1.1.0/best-practices.md#consistent-uris), e.g. that trailing slashes in URLs are significant
- Collection IDs should be unique across all collections in the corresponding root catalog and Item IDs should be unique per collection
- [Subdirectories are not recommended for Items without sidecar files any longer](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/v1.1.0/best-practices.md#catalog-layout)
- [Clarified the use of the roles `thumbnail`, `overview` and `visual`](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/v1.1.0/best-practices.md#list-of-asset-roles)

Please consult the [best practices](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/v1.1.0/best-practices.md) document for details.

## Other Extension

In addition to the changes in the core specification, we also updated some extensions.
I already mentioned the deprecation of the Item Assets extension and the band-related changes in the EO and Raster extensions above.

An additional change in the raster extension is that the common band names have been extended, especially `rededge` was split into multiple common names (`rededge071`, `rededge075` and `rededge078`) and `green05` was added.
This allows a direct mapping between the STAC common names and the [Awesome Spectral Indices](https://github.com/awesome-spectral-indices/awesome-spectral-indices) project.

We also released a significant change to the Projection extension.

The change allows to provide CRS codes for authorities other than EPSG, e.g. OGC or IAU.
Previously only EPSG was supported via the `proj:epsg` field, e.g. `"proj:epsg": 3857` for Web Mercator.
The new version replaces the field with `proj:code` so that the authority is included in the code, e.g. `"proj:code": "EPSG:3857"`.

Version 2.0.0 of the Projection extension removes and forbids the use of `proj:epsg`.
If you want to migrate more gracefully, you can also migrate to the intermediate version 1.2.0 which deprecates `proj:epsg` and adds `proj:code` at the same time.

## Other notable changes

- If a `description` is given, it can't be empty
- Clarify in descriptions that `start_datetime` and `end_datetime` are inclusive bounds
- Two spatial bounding boxes in a Collection don't make sense and will be reported as invalid
- Clarified which media types should be used for the hierarchical relation types
- Clarified in the Markdown specification that GeometryCollections are not allowed as Item Geometry
- Clarified that JSON Schema draft-07 is the default version for Collection summaries and other versions may not be supported
