+++ 
date = "2024-05-28T07:00:00-00:00" 
title = "Sponsorship Call: Air Quality Data Access Sprint – A Global Initiative Rooted in Africa" 
tags = [ "" ] 
slug = "Sponsorship Call: Air Quality Data Access Sprint – A Global Initiative Rooted in Africa"
summary = "This is a call for sponsors to support a working sprint focused on Enhancing Air Quality Data Access in Kigali, Rwanda from July 30th to 31st." 
+++

On behalf of the Cloud-Native Geospatial Foundation, we invite your organization to become a sponsor for the upcoming working sprint on **Enhancing Air Quality Data Access in Africa**. This event will be held on July 30-31, 2024 at the Radisson Blu Hotel & Convention Centre in Kigali, Rwanda. Building on Rwanda’s leadership in air quality initiatives, we’re convening local professionals, as well as experts from across Africa and around the world. 

### Why Rwanda?
Africa faces some of the most severe air quality challenges. Fortunately, the affordability of air quality sensors have led to improved monitoring and a wealth of data across the continent and the world. While this is a positive development, the lack of common data schemas and file formats hinders effective sharing and analysis, limiting this data’s potential to inform air quality solutions. By convening this sprint in Africa, we can leverage the expertise and perspectives of African air quality professionals to explore the need for accessible and user-friendly data formats to make air quality data easier to access and use. 

The overall goal is to facilitate easier air quality data sharing by understanding how air quality data is used to inform decision-making and environmental policy by leaders in Africa. This will not only empower African research communities, many of whom are often excluded from global working sprints due to visa restrictions but also benefit air quality analysis efforts worldwide. This sprint is by invitation only but do [sign up here to stay informed](https://cloudnativegeo.us21.list-manage.com/subscribe?u=9007e9da43631cae49faa141c&id=2015a8d705) about future air quality initiatives.

### Your sponsorship will directly contribute 
- **Enhancing Global Representation:** Providing travel and accommodation grants for international participants to create a globally diverse group of air quality professionals can participate, fostering an inclusive approach. 
- **Maintaining Momentum:** Supporting the creation of educational resources and fostering post-sprint initiatives to keep the momentum going toward global adoption. 

### Sponsorship Levels
- We offer various sponsorship packages to suit your organization’s goals:

**Convening Sponsor** - pledge at least $10,000. This sponsorship level includes:
- Be recognized as the **Lead Sponsor** for the working sprint
- Opportunity to deliver a keynote address
- Everything that is included in the “Platinum Sponsorship” level

**Platinum Sponsor** - pledge at least $5,000. This sponsorship level includes:
- Recognition as a founding sponsor of the air quality data workshop
- Exclusive recognition during key plenary 
- Everything that is included in the “Gold Sponsorship” level

**Gold Sponsor** - pledge at least $2,500. This sponsorship level includes:
- Short talk on your organization’s air quality data solutions
- Everything that is included in the “Silver Sponsorship” level

**Silver Sponsor** - pledge at least $1,000. This sponsorship level includes:
- Logo included on all material produced (handouts, GitHub, etc)
- A prominent callout on social media 
- Everything that is included in the “Supporter Sponsorship” level

**Supporter Sponsor** - pledge at least $500. This sponsorship level includes:
- Be mentioned in all communications about the sprint

To submit your sponsorship pledge and help us ease air quality data sharing, please [fill out the form](https://forms.gle/r4dvPC8cphfhDhyu9). If you have any questions before or after submitting, please email hello@cloudnativegeo.org 
