---
weight: 1
title: "CNG Conference 2026"
when_date: "06 - 09 October 2025"
where: "Snowbird, Utah"
description: ""
price: "Ticket prices coming soon"
images:
  - img/202610-cng-conference-26.jpg
hide_cta: true
cta_text: "Sign up to stay informed"
cta_url: "https://events.cloudnativegeo.org/cng2026interest"
passed: false
---

Join us in Snowbird, Utah, for the second annual CNG Conference, where innovators and practitioners in the geospatial industry gather to share knowledge and advance the field. Last year’s event brought together attendees from around the world for 2 ½ days of keynotes, technical sessions, workshops, and hands-on collaboration.

Set in the Rocky Mountains, the conference provides an environment conducive to learning and making meaningful connections. Engage with peers, demonstrate your solutions, and build partnerships that extend beyond the event.

**Founding Sponsors**  
CNG 2026 is made possible by our founding sponsors, who are committed to advancing open geospatial standards and community-driven innovation.

## **CNG Conference 2025 by the Numbers**

250+ attendees from more than 100 organizations, representing a broad range of expertise:

* **45%** senior-level engineering and tech professionals  
* **20%** mid-level practitioners  
* **15%** executive or leadership positions  
* **10%** students, early-career professionals, or fellows  
* **10%** consultants, product managers, and other specialists 

## **Who Attended**

CNG Conference 2025 attracted a diverse audience from commercial enterprises, research institutions, technology companies, and more: 

NASA • Google • Microsoft • AWS • Esri • Planet • The World Bank • USGS • Cargill • Carbon Mapper • Meta • NVIDIA • DuckDB Labs • The New York Times • Bloomberg • IDC, and more

## **What Attendees Said**

“Without a doubt, this was the most inspiring conference I’ve attended in a long time. The content was top-tier, with so many brilliant sessions and speakers that choosing between simultaneous talks felt like a real case of “choosing is losing.”  Federic Leclercq, Project Manager, Flanders Marine Institute from Belgium

“These three days were filled with inspiring discussions, cutting-edge knowledge sharing, and incredible networking opportunities.” Alexander Kuklin, CTO, SetClapp from Azerbaijan

“We came away from \#CNG2025 with valuable info about new libraries, projects, techniques, and needs within the community \-- we're ready to hit the ground running.” Element 84 from the US 

## **Participation Options**

Ways to participate in CNG Conference 2026\. 

* Workshops  
* Exhibit Booths  
* Sponsorships  
* Presentations  
* Fund Awards

Contribute to a growing community, participate in conversations that drive the field forward, and access shared resources.

## **Stay informed**

[Sign up](https://events.cloudnativegeo.org/cng2026interest) to receive updates on registration, the call for proposals, and sponsorship opportunities.